[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Thinking Allowed,
conversations on the leading
edge of knowledge and discovery
with psychologist Jeffrey
Mishlove.
>> Hello, and welcome.
I'm Jeffrey Mislove.
Today, we are going to
explore the journey of Christ.
With me is Dr. Jean
Houston, internationally
renowned speaker, teacher,
and leader of leaders.
She is the author
of numerous books,
including Search for the
Beloved, The Possible Human,
and Godseed.
Welcome, Jean.
>> Thank you, Jeffrey.
It's good to be with you again.
>> It's a pleasure
to be with you.
You know, I'm not
a Christian person.
I was raised Jewish.
But I have to say,
looking out at the world,
one can't help but be
astounded at the impact
that the myth or the story or
the history, the life of Christ
has had on the human race.
>> Well, I think there's a
very good reason for this.
You know, it's as if
in the life of Jesus,
he recapitulates
the entire history,
the entire saga of humankind.
Here he is, born the
miraculous child.
And to me, that
refers to the fact
that we are all there in
an immaculate condition.
We have an open
road of potential.
Everything is possible.
And then he has his ministry,
in which he does the impossible.
He explores all manner
of ways of being.
He accepts everybody, you know.
A modern corporate
advisor would never
be able to bring
in people the way
he did-- hey, you in the
brothel, come on, come join me.
Hey, you, the fisherman,
come, come, you know?
This agreement to bring
in the entire spectrum
of the human race.
>> Now, there is a book out
called Jesus Christ, CEO.
>> CEO, yeah.
He does miracles.
And miracles are
merely more modes
of understanding our reality
than we normally see, you know?
He undergoes tremendous
suffering, and then upsy daisy,
you know, he's back again.
And that's true of many of us.
How many of us have really
died many times in our life,
through depression,
through illness,
through just going
taking the wrong path
and then to come back?
So it's as if it
is a recapitulation
of the entire possibility
of the human species.
>> And sort of an
expression, I gather,
of the great myths
of all of humanity,
death and resurrection.
>> Death and resurrection,
you find in--
well, a great
percentage of the myths,
that we die to our
local condition and we
are reborn to a higher
condition in ourselves.
I mean, if I were to ask
you how often in your life
if you died and been reborn
in one way or another--
>> A couple of times.
>> Yes.
>> And we live in a world where
there seems to be, however,
a lot of tension
amongst Christians,
people such as yourself who
are visionary, global people.
And then there are
fundamentalists who say, no, we
must look at this story
in its most literal sense.
>> Well, I think they leave--
they lose a great deal.
Because the story
is like a coded--
it's a code.
It's like a seed crystal in
a super saturated solution.
Wherever you put the
story, it opens you up.
It opens you up to
the human drama.
I mean, you look at
Christ's message,
where he says the
kingdom is within you,
the kingdom, the depths.
It means that we
contain such a treasure
house of creative
possibilities, of potentials,
of skills, of the ability
to access and to enter
into beingness with God.
He says, the things
I do, you shall
do but you shall
do better, in John.
He calls us into our greatness.
>> As if he is a template for
what the human race can become.
>> Exactly, wonderful.
Yes, he is a pattern of
possibility, the higher man,
you see?
And I think what
he does, perhaps
as much as any spiritual
leader in history,
is he really calls forth the
possible human, what we can be.
Look at his deep sensory
appreciation of nature.
He's always talking about mint
and cumin and tasty things,
and he goes to one
party after another.
I mean, if that
number of parties
got screened through
the New Testament,
you can imagine what the
reality probably was, you know?
You look at
psychologically, the way
he relates with
such leaky margins,
with such empathy to
everyone he meets,
his deep appreciation
of children,
his calling forth of children,
the little child shall lead us.
And yet, his ability
to suffer so deeply
in the garden of Gethsemane.
He didn't want what
was about to come,
let this cup pass-- how
often we have said that?
I mean, the very fact
that his life has moved
into mystery and into myth.
You know, there were many
people in Palestine, Israel
at that time, who were
looking for the Messiah.
And some claimed
to be the Messiah.
And what was unique
about him is here
you had the great tale of the
mystery, the dying and rising
God, which of course, was
one of the great stories
and celebrations in
the ancient world.
But here you had a person
who actually did it.
So this is the nature
of the cross, you know?
Here's a Jewish
political tragedy,
and here is the great mystery
of death and Resurrection.
So a human being incorporated in
space and time and form touches
into the depths
of human capacity
and knows that I and
my Father are one,
that we are all children
of God, that we are all--
we are all part of
the divine parentage.
>> Well, it's interesting from
a cross-cultural perspective.
In the Asian religions, there
are many religious teachers
who say, you know,
atman is Brahmin.
I am one with the
infinite, with the eternal.
>> And they say, well,
very good for you.
You finally realized it.
It's about time.
And here we say, kill the idiot.
Because we have this sense,
especially in the West,
of being disconnected from
the source of our being.
And what you find in
Yeshua ben Yusuf--
he never heard
Jesus of Nazareth.
He heard--
>> That's a Greek name.
>> Yes, Jesus would be.
But Yeshua, or
Joshua ben Yusuf--
>> He didn't speak Greek.
>> He-- well, no.
You remember, he was a Galilean.
Galilei, in the circle of
gentiles, that's what it means.
And he lived in a
tremendous crossroads.
>> I see.
>> So he would
have known Greeks,
probably spoke some
Greek, certainly Roman,
certainly Latin.
>> OK, Aramaic.
>> Hebrew, Aramaic.
So he was a rabbi.
He was a very cultured man.
And I think judging
by a lot of things
that were said
about him, that he
had a very fine knowledge of the
ancient world as it was then.
This was not a local yokel.
>> Over 2,000 years,
each generation,
each age and many different
organized bodies of religion
have interpreted his life--
>> And have reinvented him.
He's really the man for all
seasons and for all eras,
you know?
Right now, there's
a tremendous spread
of Christianity
all over the world.
And I think it's just because
of the essential hope that he
offers, the whole sense that
you are much larger than you
think you are.
You are a child of the universe.
You are a member
of a universe that
is larger than your aspiration,
more complex than all
your dreams.
You have access to the
orchestration of realities.
You can make things grow.
You can heal.
You can.
And he keeps saying, you can.
Don't just look at
me, look at what
I am reflecting what you are
and what you can be and do.
>> Well, there is a funny
sense in which as you speak
for the meaning of this
extraordinary life,
some people have said, in fact,
that your teachings are not
very Christian.
And I think as I
recall, you've responded
by saying, well, Jesus might not
have been a Christian himself.
>> No, he would have
probably had a bad time.
But I have a kind of
a joke about this.
I say if Jesus and Buddha
and Moses were to come back,
Moses would be
leading desert tours,
Buddha would have been at
Esalen, or one of the growth
seminars, and Jesus would have
been on all the talk shows.
And yet, of course, they all had
their problems in their time,
didn't they?
>> Well, but that statement
seems to speak more for our own
age, an age in which things
become somehow trivialized
by mass culture.
>> Well, mass culture does that.
But the other thing
about mass culture
is that it is able to
celebrate these great lives.
I mean, how many lives
of Jesus have you seen?
And it is always a
shock of recognition,
regardless of how tawdry
might be the production.
>> You have a great sense
of humor talking about it,
but I know in your undertaking
to write this book of the life
of Christ, Godseed, that this
was something that came from
your own depths.
>> It came from my own
ambivalence about the story.
My father was an
agnostic Baptist.
He didn't believe anything.
And my mother was a
Sicilian Catholic.
And so I went to Catholic
school the first year.
And I looked at Jesus
up there on the cross,
and I heard the
priest saying how
Jesus was going to do nasty
things to us and hell.
And I said to my Sicilian
grandmother, nonna,
is that our Jesus
he's talking about?
She says, no,
[SPEAKING ITALIAN],, she said,
no.
That's just Jesu of the priest.
You and me, we know the
real Jesu, you know?
And so who is this
being who has evoked
such response to hundreds
of millions of people?
And that's why I wrote Godseed.
And I wrote it in such a
way that people could follow
the story and be part of it.
As in many of my books,
we have exercises.
So I literally take you into
being reborn as the holy child.
I take you into exercises
when you really learn
to do deep m deep recognition.
I studied the way
Jesus did his miracles.
And I found that in the
miraculous, what he did
is he would first
look at a person
with such love and such
wonder and astonishment.
So that was already a shock.
That was an altered
state, you know?
And then he would say
things like, your sins,
your unskilled
behavior is forgiven.
Forget it.
You're released.
And then he would
touch them, or he
would provide this
what we consider
vitalizing life energy.
And he would see them in
their optimal template,
their optimal possibility.
And then it was as
if the Godseed in him
would recognize the
Godseed in others.
And of course, then the
whole system, the whole body,
mind, being was
transfigured, was
changed because he
could hold, in the way
that the ordinary
person couldn't, he
could hold the
optimal possibility.
Because he lived in the kingdom.
So the kingdom is in the midst.
In one of the Gnostic
Gospels, he said,
if you look for the
kingdom up there,
the birds will get
there before you do.
If you look for the
kingdom down in the sea,
the fish are going to be there.
The kingdom is right here.
It is in the midst.
It's within you.
It's without you.
Living in the kingdom means
in your terms, Jeffrey,
it's probably living
in the larger hologram,
living in the
quantum reality where
everything is available
at every different moment.
>> Jean, we're going
to take a short break.
We'll be back.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Welcome back.
Jean, we're talking
about the life
of Jesus and the
relationship that we
might be able to form with a
Christlike spirit within us.
And I know many
Christian churches also
talk about that relationship,
but they put it often,
it seems to me,
it's put like this,
that they refer to a
statement where Jesus says,
no one can come to the
father but through me.
I'm the only way.
>> Well, and of course, there's
always interpretations of it.
For me, it's the I am.
The I am is the God sense.
And it is that you come to
the Father through the--
you come to God
through that God self.
Meister Eckhart, one of
the great Christian mystics
of the 14th century, said,
as nuts seeds bring forth
nut trees and pear seeds
bring forth pear seeds,
so as pear seeds
bring forth pears,
nut seeds bring forth nuts, so
god seeds bring forth the gods.
And that we are god-seeded
in each one of us.
And also, there's been
the Jesus seminars.
There's been so much work
done on what did he say,
what did he really say.
And of course, I think
they tend to throw out
the baby with the
bathwater in some of this.
But what we do know,
is that we have
a person who came to a
sense, an absolute sense
of his own identity
with God, with being
with the mind, something
that we all can do.
And then he out of
the intensity of this
and his extraordinary capacity
for loving, for deep empathy,
it was that loving
empathy that allowed
him to call forth the greatness
and the genius in others.
>> There is a sense in
which your work would stand
in the tradition of
the gnostics, who.
>> Probably.
>> Who were attacked by
the early church fathers.
>> Yes, Irenaeus,
particularly, yes.
Well, yes, in so far
as that we believe,
and the gnostics also
tended to believe,
that the kingdom is within.
And many of the Gospels
were Gnostic Gospels.
The final four that came down
are just one of probably many.
And then, of course, when
in 1945, that Nag Hammadi
in Egypt.
>> Mm-hmm.
>> So many more different
papyruses and different --
>> Yes, many of
these apocryphal.
>> Apocryphal, and others.
>> Books are now
available to us.
>> That's right,
they are available.
So we do have a larger sense.
And we see a Jesus who
is whimsical, sometimes
cranky, has a great
sense of humor,
a powerful sense of paradox,
and a very, very rich mind.
>> Mm-hmm.
And clearly, influential
in his own day
to have spawned so many books.
>> Well, within the
200-year period.
>> Yeah.
>> But I think a very
important thing is his sense
of the miraculous.
That we are not limited to a
certain bandwidth of reality.
Enter into it a
sense of the kingdom,
work out of love and
compassion, and of deep seeing.
And the band expands.
And so much more
becomes possible.
>> Much of your work has
involved study of the latest
developments in cosmology.
>> Cosmology physics.
>> Quantum physics and science.
>> Biology.
>> Where it seems as if science
need not be opposed to these
ideas of religious miracles,
but may actually provide a new
foundation for
reinterpreting them.
>> Yes.
I mean, expand consciousness
along its bandwidth.
Get out of the limited
half asleep state
we call normal waking
consciousness and reality
expands.
We become part of what Bohm
called the implicate explicate
universe.
We become part of.
>> This is David Bohm.
>> David Bohm.
We become part of this
universe in which we
have, as self-conscious members,
we have a much larger part
to play.
And what these religious
geniuses like Jesus, Buddha,
I mean, so many that we
could name, what they did is,
they tapped into this immensity.
And they then saw
our local reality
as glorious and
beautiful and filled
with the passion
for the possible
that normal people didn't see.
I think what we're
living in a time, where
if we're going to
survive our time
and deal with
present complexity,
the extraordinary has
to become ordinary.
>> Well, there is a sense that
the traditionalists are saying,
in these frightening times,
we have to return to Jesus,
to traditional values.
There is a sense in which you're
saying something very similar
to that.
>> Well, I think the
return is, of course,
it's a different interpretation
of what Jesus is saying.
>> Mm-hmm.
>> It isn't Jesus
as totally other.
But Jesus as serving as a
template for our own becoming.
>> To access our own.
>> To access.
>> Inner greatness.
>> In the 15th century, the
favorite book of the time was
called "The
Imitation of Christ."
>> Yes.
>> By Thomas a Kempis.
And there were many
variations of that.
And people actively sought.
>> Mm-hmm.
>> Unfortunately, too often
in the medieval, like,
high Middle Ages, what
they sought was to emulate
the suffering.
And not the.
>> They would scorch themselves.
>> Capacity.
They would scorch, not
the capacity for loving.
>> But that idea of the
imitation of Christ is.
>> The imitation
of, that we all.
>> You seem to be suggesting
we're not talking about a cheap
imitation here.
>> No.
I'm saying that we're talking
about a profound identity.
I have known a number
of people in my life
who have been deeply identified
with a Christian sensibility
influence.
And it is amazing how
their minds have soared.
How their spirits
were so rich and deep.
How deep they could love.
One of them was a man I called
Mr. Teilhard, who turned out
to be Teilhard de Chardin.
>> He's a great theologian.
Very.
And a great paleontologist.
And.
>> Who was, incidentally,
silenced by the church.
>> Was silenced by the church.
But still, he got his work out.
>> Yes.
>> And it has had a profound
effect on theologians
and scientists alike.
Well, that's somebody who
certainly also emulated
that Christ spirit.
>> And there seems to be a
need for that in our time.
>> We have a need for greatness.
We live in a time
in which we can
no longer live as half
asleep versions of ourselves.
In the Gnostic Gospels, Jesus
said, I came into this world
because you were all drunk.
You were all asleep.
I came to wake you up.
Not unlike the Buddha.
When they said to the Buddha,
sir, what exactly are you?
Are you a god?
Certainly not a god.
Are you an angel then?
No, I'm not an angel.
What are you?
Oh, I'm just awake,
said the Buddha.
Well, Christ said something
very, very, very similar.
That when we wake
up, and all of us
have had moments of
waking up, if even
for the rest of the drowse
of our days we go to sleep,
we can still remember
that time of waking up.
Where suddenly, I
mean sensorally,
everything took on this
brilliance, this energy,
this vitality, this glory.
Psychologically it was as if we
no longer had the psychic skin.
We had this deep
empathy with people.
Mystically, we saw our lives
as part of a much larger story.
And spiritually,
we knew ourselves
as God's seeds incarnate.
And that's what it's like.
It's an extraordinary
experience.
I think there is a return to the
mystic path in our time really.
Mysticism is the art
of union with reality.
And that's, of course,
what Jesus did.
And the mystic is one who really
realizes that that union is not
only possible, it's necessary.
How are we going to deal
with the immense complexities
of our time if we are
not also god-seeded,
god-partnered, and
are in a sense,
we are the partner of
this larger process.
We are agents of the process.
And when you look
at the mystic path,
it really is very close to
Jesus' path as we see it.
And I try to show
that in my book.
That you wake up.
That there is that
statement, aha.
Oh, yes!
And then there is that
sense often of uh oh,
I've got to do
something about it.
I've got to cleanse myself.
So we have the story
of Jesus wakening.
Then we have a
story of his going
into the desert
to cleanse himself
of old habits, old
traditions, old expectations.
The devil, you know,
is a projection
says, I'll give you the
cities of the world,
get thee behind me, Satan, my
kingdom is of another order.
So that's the release.
And then followed
by the ministry,
which is the state of
illumination, of visionary
seeing of the miraculous.
This is also part
of the mystic path.
>> Doing good in the world.
And great happiness, all those
parties, great celebration.
And then, of course, what
goes up must come down,
and you have the dark
night of the soul.
Jesus, of course, the
story and gets him and he--
And then, of course,
the crucifixion.
And then the final stage
is unification, union.
>> And there's.
>> Resurrection.
And that's true of many of our
lives, of all of our lives.
>> There seems to be a
paradox in this life.
That he who was crucified, who
met so much opposition, who
was an outsider of
the established order
has now become in many ways,
the symbol of mainstream
established
religious traditions.
>> I think he'd be
quite astonished.
I often thought
that if Jesus could
see what was done
in his name, he'd
have gone back into
the carpenter's shop
and would not have come out.
But that's probably not true.
Yes, things begin in, in
so many different things.
You have the primary revelation.
You have the one who has
the fullness of spirit.
And then you have the second
and third and fourth generation,
and there's a diminution.
And then an occasional genius.
But that's true of anything and
anybody and any institution.
>> The things get crystallized.
>> They get crystallized,
they get encapsulated,
they get stuck.
And people settle for mediocrity
and not the radical demand.
The problem with Jesus
is his radical demand.
>> Yes.
>> These things I
do, you shall do,
you are a son and daughter of
God, and better live as such.
>> So even as sort of a
mainstream religious icon,
he's calling people to
something revolutionary.
>> And evolutionary.
Not simply revolutionary.
He's calling us to the unfolding
of our primary condition, which
is stewards of revolution,
stewards of the taking
care of the planet.
I mean, what would happen
to this planet, Jeffrey,
if we all became Christic?
How would we then
be able to see?
I mean he who looked
so closely at nature
and used all these natural
images, consider the birds,
consider the lilies, neither
do they, they don't sow,
they don't reap, and yet
Solomon all his glory
and array as these, they
just hang out and are happy.
What would it be like?
How would we take the
Christic attitude, that deep
compassionate caring, evoke it?
>> It sounds like
we might be less.
>> We'd be very different.
>> Concerned with our material
welfare and more concerned with
healing the planet.
>> The treasures in heaven, the
treasures in the depths of what
we are.
And from the depths
of what, I've
spent a lifetime looking
at the treasures within.
And I assure you, if we began
to use just a tiny percentage
of the capacities that we have
and the knowledge that all
of us have, this would be
a very different planet
within 20 years.
>> And we have that possibility.
>> We certainly
do, and we have to.
We've run out of time.
We have to use it.
We have to become what we
are, the possible human who
creates the possible society.
>> Jean Houston, we
have run out of time.
But it's such a
joy to be with you
and to have this sense of our
own inner greatness reawakened
through this conversation.
Jean, thanks so much
for being with me.
>> Thank you,
Jeffrey, thank you.
>> It's been a pleasure.
And thank you for being with us.
[MUSIC PLAYING]